Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there.
Well, with that, I am so excited to be joined by our featured leader today, Frank Hull,
Director of Data Science and Analytics at ACES. Frank, I would love it if you would
introduce yourself. Tell us a little bit about you, what you do, and something you like to
do for fun.
Yeah, yeah. So I lead a data science team in energy, which is a lot of fun. We get to
solve a lot of difficult tasks. Also, you know, for fun, I have a lot of different hobbies.
I kind of think of them as, like, cyclic. So right now I'm really into gardening. It's
kind of taking over right now just because I'm in the middle of summer in Colorado. But
other than that, you know, I spend a lot of time outdoors. So hiking, climbing, camping
is a big part of my life. Also really into playing guitar. I've been learning drums over
the last few years. I'm kind of a musician first before I ever got into math or data
or anything like that. Maybe I always try to think of it, I'm like, why do I like number
patterns so much? I think it's just because I studied guitar tabs so much in middle school
and high school, just to learn new songs. And then I started noticing number patterns
and I was like, oh, I'm going to get into math. But other hobbies, I kind of went back
and forth from homebrewing and doing other stuff like that. I have two sons, so three
in one. So mostly playing with monster trucks and Hot Wheels in my free time. And then,
you know, I'm also, like, been working in open source software a little bit here and
there, kind of building packages out in R, posting those on GitHub and just kind of talking
about it on Blue Sky or X or something like that. So kind of like a hobby of many hobbies.
And then, kind of goes back to my team, I think we're all kind of full stack data scientists.
So we all do a little bit of shiny, do a little bit of data engineering, do some machine learning
and everything in between.
Awesome. Well, I want to dig in a little bit to what you do and give everybody a little
bit of context so that they can ask good questions in Slido. Because not everybody kind of knows
a lot about energy markets or the energy industry. And when I learned what you do,
I was shocked because you told me that your team oversees over a thousand models. And
I was like, excuse me, what? Did you just, like, was that a verbal typo? Like more than
a thousand models? Why do you need that? But then you explained it to me and it made perfect
sense. So I'd love it if you could talk a little bit about that.
Yeah, totally. Yeah. So, like, we're in wholesale energy. So, like, ACES is an alliance of cooperatives
for energy services. We have a whole kind of menu of services that we offer from front
office to back office. I'm in front office. I support our portfolio management team, our
portfolio strategy team, our portfolio modeling team. We also have resource planning and fundamentals
and a capacity team. And then we kind of, like, bounce ideas back and forth with the
transmission team. So there's, like, all these different teams that are, like, supporting
these co-ops. And really, we're trying to lower their variable costs, but also understand
the risk associated with the portfolio. And, like, you would think you could set up, like,
one model, but, like, just like the whole fact that the United States is split up into
different ISOs and they have different regulations, they have different resource mix, they – each
one of our portfolios could be in a different area of that ISO, and that brings on different
challenges. So, you know, we're simulating over 40 portfolios, and then each of those
have their own – maybe more than one load. And whenever I say load, I guess it's – so,
like, load is being, like, a demand on the system. So it's kind of a supply and demand
problem. And you need to serve this load. And they might be in an area of the country
that has tons of wind. They might be in an area of the country that's, like, natural
gas and solar and battery. And all of these things create different issues with the way
that you can kind of create a supply mix to serve that load.
We have a quick question to interject. What's ISO?
Yeah, it's an independent system operator. There's a lot of acronyms in energy. So I'll
try not to say too many, but please stop me if I do. Yeah.
So I think that the gist is there is so much variation across a region, across a town,
between towns, not only in the energy that they demand, but also the energy that is available
to be consumed, right? So you've got to model – you've got to model, for example,
the San Antonio metropolitan area where I live. Like, how much are we going to need?
And you go out a pretty far time horizon, like 25 years, right?
Yeah, yeah. So whether you regulate it or not, you kind of want to have an idea of what's
going to happen in the next hour. Or then you start thinking, you're like, I want to know what's
going to happen tomorrow, so there's a day ahead market. And then when you're doing financial
planning and analysis, you want to know what happens next year. But then when you're talking
to a city council or talking about putting new steel in the ground, and you're trying to defend
whether or not to build a new combustion turbine in this area of the country,
you kind of need to simulate out 25 years to understand what the hourly price shapes would be,
what the hourly demand might be in that area, what the supply mix is going to be, and then
whether or not that particular hedge or new generator would even be useful in that area
of the country. So you start like, I want to know what happens in the next five minutes,
the next hour. I want to plan for tomorrow. And then you start getting everyone in on the company,
and you're like, okay, well, we need to plan years ahead of time. And the independent system
operator is also a market, so it's trying to also help that planning. But there's also
non-ISO areas of the United States too. So regardless, you kind of don't want to have
a blackout. So how do we mitigate that? And also- What happened in Texas in 2021?
Yeah, yeah. You don't want to run out of supply when there's high demand. So that's a huge issue,
especially if demand is increasing across the United States.
One more context-building thing that Frank had told me the last time I talked to him that I
thought was really interesting was that some regions have surplus energy, and that the energy
price can actually be negative. You could have a price for energy that is zero. That kind of blew
my mind a little bit. If there's an area where there is a bunch of wind electricity being
generated, but there aren't a lot of homes there consuming that power, where does that power go?
And how do you make sure that it ends up where there are high population density areas that
really need that? That's a really tough problem to solve, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah. And you can think of this as not anyone's fault, but wind just blows more in
Kansas, Oklahoma, Minnesota, but not a lot of people are in those areas. So then you have to
build transmission to get it to the demand. So, Kansas City being really far away from
western Kansas where you see tons of wind farms, so how do you get that wind power over to the
people? And within the markets, it's designed in a way so it's going to desensitize supply where
there's already tons of supply and no demand. So, you'll see prices go negative around
renewable generation where there's a pocket of renewables and they haven't quite built out the
transmission. So, yeah, you have to – you start simulating, you come up with like a vanilla model,
and it starts to work for everywhere, and then you start running into these edge cases and you
have to build new models to handle these different nodes. So, that's where you end up thinking I have
one model to simulate top-down. I'm just thinking total load of the system,
total wind of the system, total solar penetration of the system. And then you're like, okay, I got
a pretty good net load model for the entire system. But then you start getting into nuances
of, hey, I need to simulate this one node for this portfolio that happens to be a wind turbine
surrounded by other wind turbines. And you're like, how do I create a price shape for that location?
It can be negative quite often. So, yeah, there is this really interesting markets plus energy,
plus physics, plus engineering that all goes into it. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. And for anybody wondering, Frank's background is physics, but this does seem like
a lot of finance, economics, mechanical engineering even, a little bit in there,
electrical engineering. Well, we have so many good questions in the slide out. They are
stacking up like crazy. So, let's see if we can get through some of them. Thank you, everybody,
for asking your amazing questions. And the one that I see that I think would be great to start
with is from Edward Leland. Edward, are you available to unmute and ask your question live?
If so, I think it's going to cover a couple of other questions. I know Arsenis had asked one that
was really sort of in the same line. And so, I might add on a little bit of Arsenis's teeters.
All right. Yeah. Sounds good. Hey, I'm also a physics background person. I was my undergrad.
I was a double major in physics comp sci. Good to know other people got out of physics and are
doing comp sci stuff. I don't know. It broke my brain. Anyway, sorry. Here's the question.
What are your go-to models for analysis in your field? Because you got like 1,000 plus.
Do you have to evaluate every problem individually, or do you have a class
or type of models that you get to use for a lot of different applications?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I think you have a class by maybe fuel resource type. So, we have a few engineering models for
wind turbines, and that might change depending on what kind of turbine lane is on the particular
wind farm or what the manufacturer is. Same with solar, depending on where it's located
and you have an understanding of the kind of solar irradiance in that area and what kind of panel it
is. We have pretty good engineering models for those as well. When it comes to kind of coming
up with like demand profiles and price shapes, those can – you can start trying a few statistical
methods, but I think you end up kind of doing a few different machine learning methods. So, that
tree-based, rule-based, linear models, polynomial models, those work pretty well depending on how
you kind of feature engineer. So, I think that's kind of where it really helps to work with the
business. So, like, that's where my team's kind of working with all these portfolio strategists,
portfolio management teams, where they might see and have a hunch on, like, hey, this is what's
driving this congestion. I think that's what's driving this negative pricing. And then you're
working with them and kind of feed that into the model, and then the model picks up on the
price patterns. So, that's kind of our methodology. My team, we're using tiny models for
80 percent, 90 percent of the models that we're building, doing everything from scratch. So, yeah.
That's awesome.
Yeah. Yeah, there's a few other resources in Python, Julia and R. NREL, they make a lot of
toolkits. And then when you're – sometimes I talk – I say model a lot, so I'm always saying, like,
regression model, but then there's the portfolio modelers that have a portfolio model. And then
I'm talking to IT about models, and they're, like, talking data model, and I'm like, okay,
I'm talking about regression model here. The portfolio modeling team has their own software
as well. And that's kind of putting together all of the PNLs off of the loads and the supplies and
stacking that and coming up with the average variable cost and risk associated with it.
Yeah, lots and lots of the word model getting used in different terms. Well, I wanted to tack
on Ari's question. I hope you don't mind if I grab some of the bits of your question and ask
them here. Okay, good. Because he had asked in the same vein, like, do you tend to use traditional
stochastic models for time series analysis or more of the recent ML methods in time series analysis?
I'm also curious about whether you have used LSTM, which is long short-term memory,
for longer-term predictions and how that has performed. Yeah, yeah, that's a great question.
You know, we've moved away from Monte Carlo. So, I would say 10 years ago, I was doing a lot of
Monte Carlo stochastic simulation. So, I think the problem is like with when you start introducing
when you're in a transitional time. So, you went from just like, all right, is coal or is natural
gas cheaper? Then we know which plant is going to run and we can kind of simulate those commodities
and come up multiplying by the heat rate of that power plant, come up with a power price.
And you're kind of chasing that. Then now we have like, we started introducing wind, it's taking
over like 50% of the world and then you start adding solar and then batteries. And then you
have like these price shapes that just for Monte Carlo simulation are just the tails are too fat
and long. So, we start doing machine learning everywhere for stochastics. So, starting with,
you can start really simple, just take like one weather day and just trying to understand like
what one weather day, what are the options for a wind profile, a solar profile, and a load profile.
And then you can come up with the net load and the subsequent price shape. So,
then I say that one weather day, then you can just do that over a thousand times and you have a
thousand load solar and wind shapes. So, I think that's kind of like what we're moving towards as
an industry standard. I see that across other companies. There's at least like 7 out of the
10 companies that I know are moving towards that are already there. And then that's where we are,
and we're providing the service for over 45, 46 energy companies across the United States.
So, I think everyone's more inclined to like saying like a billion dollar extreme weather
event disasters keeps increasing over time. That's like, I think all the risk is associated with
weather. So, trying to understand that and starting from that framework instead of just a simple
Monte Carlo simulation. That's a great question. And then LSTMs, we don't use those.
I work with Purdue and their geodata science department on testing out a few in MISO.
Just the complexity and then the computation time. And then I just don't think for us,
we don't have our data like normalized and stationary enough for that to be scalable
across all the data. A tree-based model or root-based models better for that, in my opinion.
Very good to know. This is really good information for anyone who's like,
where can I do this in practice? Like I learned all these things in grad school or undergrad,
and I kind of want to do this. The energy industry might be a place for you, right?
We had a couple of questions in the Slido that were about like what is a full-stack data scientist?
I think Noor had asked and Abigail as well. Abigail has a little asterisk by her saying like,
hey, I can't ask this right now. So, I'm going to ask it for her. But I wanted to give sort of
you the chance to talk a little bit about your background as well because you told me
that you learned. This is such a backward experience from what I normally see
for everybody. You learned like Python in undergrad. You got out into industry and
you learned Excel in industry. You were like confronted with huge Excel files.
And then your IT department asked you if you know R. Now, every IT department that I have
ever talked to, I have been trying to convince them to let me work in R, not the other way around.
So, if you could talk a little bit about how that happened for you. And then the question from
Abigail and I think from Noor as well was like, what does full-stack data scientist mean to you?
How do you explain that you're a full-stack data scientist to someone without confusing them?
What's the overlap between a full-stack data scientist and something like an NL engineer
or a data engineer? Yeah. Yeah. Those are all great questions. I was scrolling through here
and I didn't realize how many people were here. But I was looking for the person that recommended
R, see if he was in here. I don't think he is. He might be. I could have skipped over his name.
But yeah, we have a short-term analytics team and he had led analytics services,
part of IT, kind of being that arm to help out our term training and stuff like that. And
he looked over my shoulder one day and was just like, hey, I see you messing around with VBA.
Have you ever heard of R? And I was just like, no, I've never heard of R. I was someone that
if I ever had to find the max in a vector, I was creating my own algorithm
look for a max. I didn't realize people use the form, just max in Excel and use max in R.
I was like, whoa, you already have half of the problem solved for you. Yeah. So from physics,
I was learning C, Fortran, Python, and I got into a business and I was like, what is...
Excel was a way for me to do data entry in a lab and then take that back and write a report.
I never had thought that someone could build a full model in Excel or... I didn't know
what SQL was. I was like, what is this? So I learned all of that and data science wasn't
like a degree or a program when I went to college. So it was something that I happened into
because I kind of really liked simulations. Like that was what I wanted to do. I didn't even want
necessarily want to do physics. I was like concentrating in engineering, but had a CAD minor
and then computer science on top of that. And I was just like, if I learn all this, maybe I'll
be able to do something. So at that point, got into industry, I already felt kind of like
I had a little bit of everything going on. I hire people like that, that you can see can
do multiple tasks. And I think of our whole team as being like a knowledge sphere.
If someone would come in and add to that knowledge sphere, that's great. And then if they already know
other pieces of the knowledge sphere, that's awesome. And I think we can all share that
knowledge sphere with each other. And that's where it's like, I think I might have our manager
of data science here. He's an ML engineer pretty much, but like he's a manager of data science
because he's seen enough across the whole spectrum of data science. And then like my lead data
scientist who might be in here, I saw him of himself. That's like a funny character in this
group. I was like, that's probably him. He's almost more like also a data engineer. He's
also a plumber, building plumber APIs all the time, building shiny applications.
He's also like scheduling and automating tasks on Cron with our new data analyst that we just
hired. And she's been doing unit testing and she has more of a software engineer background.
There's like study stuff that I've never learned. So it's like we can come in and all have like
different backgrounds that like teach each other the other aspects. I have another data scientist
that we just hired. So I like my team's growing this year. So I have quite a few new people, but
she had been a data role where in a company that everything came back to her. And from
agile development to like what data's in the database to how do I build a predictive algorithm
on top of this? So I try to like, I think like full stack is like, maybe you have like,
you're maybe not perfect and shiny, but you know how to build a shiny app, at least with the proper
tool. It's like, maybe you can't do it from scratch, but you know how to use shiny assistant
and like, and like get an application going on top of your machine learning algorithm. Maybe you
don't know a ton of machine learning, but you can lean on someone else and learn quite a bit
on the team. And so then you end up within a couple of years, you know, you know, a little
bit of data engineering, a little bit of ML engineering, a little bit of shiny application
development, and then like launching an API and doing automation. So I feel like
every person has a strength and weakness too, so. That's great to know because there's a question,
there's an anonymous question in the Slido that says, is there a specific data science skill set
that's needed to get into energy analysis? So time series, but like, is there anything else?
It sounds like there's room for a lot of different skill sets. Yeah, yeah, there is. So like
if you are just really good at SQL, I think there's opportunities. And then my team, you know,
my team is leaning more towards machine learning and working with the business, but there's other
data scientists in our company that work under IT and like handle other processes, you know. So
I think if you want to get into energy, you know, I think it's kind of just like a little bit,
maybe learn a little bit about simulation, a little bit about like Monte Carlo methods,
that'll get you in the door, knowing some SQL. There's just so much, like so many different
avenues to like get you into the door too, because if you have an economic background,
you can start off as a real-time trader and then kind of like edge your way into a company that
way too. Yeah, you had mentioned at some point working at an energy trading desk and I was like,
wait, what? Were you a finance major? No, you were a physics major. So I thought that was
really interesting that there really is a lot of different skill sets being smooshed together,
and they all benefit the team as a whole. So thank you, anonymous asker, for that good question.
And we have one other question that is just kind of adding on to that, which is a clarification.
What is the portfolio model? You've said portfolio model a few times.
Yeah, yeah. So a portfolio just being like a company or, you know, when I work for a company,
in the past, I've worked out of a company that had all of their portfolios, each of their LLCs. So
kind of, it could be with or without a demand, but at Asus, it's a company. So it could be
a city water and power, it could be just like some energy company that serves part of Texas,
or it could be an energy company that just basically has been around for 15 years to 50 years.
And they have maybe, maybe they have a coal plant. Maybe they don't, maybe they have five
natural gas turbines. Maybe they do or don't. Maybe they're in an area where they just purchase
bilaterally off of other counterparties, and they don't own any resources at all.
The portfolio model is designed so you can kind of understand what their
more or less like monthly average variable cost and risk associated with that variable cost would
be. So you're still like doing like a, you could do a Monte Carlo or a machine learning
stochastic simulation of all of the wind patterns that their wind turbines would fall under, all of
the solar patterns that their solar farms would fall under, and their loads associated with that.
And then all of the price shapes that you would multiply these volumes by. And then you could
come up with this risk associated with, hey, like, on average we see the cost of this portfolio,
this stack of resources. We see the cost of this portfolio being $30 per megawatt hour for this
month. But there's up, like, it could go up to $75 per megawatt hour if this scenario happens.
But that's only 1 in 100 scenarios. So. Awesome. That's a lot of variables.
Yeah, yeah. It's a lot. And also, like, I didn't even really, we didn't really even talk about all
of the different types of energy that could go into a portfolio, right? Like, there's wind energy,
solar energy, coal, natural gas. Am I missing something? Hydro? Battery. Yeah, hydro, battery.
And then there's options and, like, bilateral purchases. So, like, you know, if I just want
to serve my 1,000 megawatt pound, I only have 950. I could either serve that leftover 50 megawatts
by the market, maybe multiple markets. It kind of depends where you are in, like,
in the region of the country and where geographically you're located. But
or you could purchase that off of someone else.
It's wild that you can, like, have no resources yourself and just purchase them to re-offer them.
That's really cool. Well, I want to get to another question before we go too much longer on this one
because we have so many good questions. We're not going to get to them all. But Thomas,
Thomas Wells had asked a question that I thought was really, really great.
Thomas, would you like to unmute and ask your question?
Sure. I think Rachel unmuted me for me. Thanks. My question, I've had experience trying to
convince regulators to use machine learning models in situations that are very statistics heavy
in the energy industry. And so my question is, how have you found convincing regulators and other,
like, stats-oriented stakeholders to trust and believe your AI, fancy machine learning models
that they can't really dive in and prove to themselves as being statistically valid? Or
have you found some good ways to demonstrate that? Yeah, those are good questions.
I guess it depends if you're regulated or not too. And I guess are you trying to, like,
convince an ISO? Or are you trying to, like, defend your method in front of a city council?
My experience has mostly been in verifying energy efficiency measurements, savings associated with
energy efficiency measures. But I'm more interested in your experience, both talking with regulators
and other folks that are maybe more less regulatory driven, but also, you know,
have an interest in ensuring that your forecasts or predictions are accurate.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, it kind of depends. Like, for the most part, I haven't had too much,
like, pushback for any of our methods. You know, we have developed white papers. So,
like, that's something that I think, like, if you do have to defend yourself in front of,
like, a city council or going to an ISO and trying to, like, submit your long-term load forecast and
saying, hey, I deviated from your methodology a bit because I was trying to capture this.
And then, like, trying to, like, have that presented in a white paper,
I think that that goes a long way. And I think for me and telling you, like,
white papers are really hard to do too, especially if you're, like, constantly changing your
algorithm. So, using, you know, packaging everything and using version control goes a
long way. And then, you know, making it so, like, the white papers automatically get built
within the package down is really nice. So, like, I've been going from, like,
over just the last few years, you know, just going from, hey, I wrote this algorithm in a script.
This is a really cool script. Here, take this script. And then, like, people start editing it
and trying to change it for their one goal and purpose. And I was, like, oh, crap, now I have to
manage all these scripts. And then, you know, going and then being, like, oh, well, maybe I
should make this into a function. Eventually, we're just, like, we needed to package everything.
So, I think just starting there first and just, like, defending everything with a white paper
is really goes a long way. So, I think that's probably the best way to counteract that.
Awesome. Thank you. And while we are talking to Thomas, I figured I would just touch really
quickly on the fact that there was a question anonymously asked about, you know, are there
any good examples of, like, open data and energy? Thomas had answered a couple of different options.
I'm going to put all of those options in the chat here. Not all of them are from Thomas. But
a lot of these are just replies in a thread in Slido. So, I wanted everybody to see them
in the chat. So, thank you to that anonymous asker who asked about data that you can use to learn.
And thank you, Thomas, for the wonderful question.
Libby, I was just warning you your video went off. And I am just telling you because I
accidentally used a Zoom shortcut that was making that happen to me, too.
I bet it did. I pressed something on my keyboard. Thanks for letting me know.
I was copying and pasting the other day. I noticed that happened to me, too.
I wonder what that is. Somebody go Google Zoom shortcuts and tell me what I'm pressing wrong.
Okay. So, there was one other question that I am also curious about, which was, like,
how are you keeping on top of the documentation for all of these models?
Over 1,000 models is a lot. Is there any learning you could share from that
experience to help other people keep on top of their documentation?
Yeah. Yeah. And I feel like at least for, like, a white paper standpoint, it's, like,
having it for, like, kind of your overall process. And then for, like, detailed down to the model,
try, like, a few different tricks, like model scorecards and stuff like that. Making something
and I would say that this is constantly changing, too. So, like, if anyone else has
ideas to share, like, that's totally cool. But, like, keeping, like, an ID for every single model
and then having, like, all the information there that's, like,
valuable to your team, but also maybe to the strategist, maybe to the modelers. So, like,
what was the start and end date of your training data? Simple stuff like that helps. What was the
out of sample score on your test data? Stuff like that. And then you can kind of save off
model objects and come back to them if you need to. And I know, like, some industries are way
ahead, like, in health, like, care and stuff like that where they're using targets all the time.
I know that that can be beneficial in some places, too, where you can also come back and see when
the model was trained and if the new data wasn't added, then you don't need to retrain the model.
So, you basically just need to build data catalogs for everything, which was
kind of, like, eye opening, too, for me, too, because, like, I came at it, like, oh,
we can handle this and then, like, have that technical debt and have that conversation with
the team where, like, hey, no, we actually do need model scorecards and be able to have,
monitor the model health. We thought we could skip over it, but you'll come back to all these
things later. Even, like, functionizing and putting every function into a library, like,
that saves you so much time. Yeah. I heard Josh had said in the chat, like,
using Quarto websites to document the groups of models, that's such a great way to use Quarto
that, like, I hadn't thought about yet. I don't know. I heard the same exact thing,
but I know Julia Silgay led a workflow demo on model cards. Is that similar?
Oh, I don't know. It's, like, you know, that's a, we have our own, like, model card, but, like,
yeah, using Bedivere and pins is, like, another route that you can go. I'm also, like, signed up
for this workshop for the orbital. I might use that some places. I don't know. Do you all use
Snowflake or no? No, we do not, but I still think there's, like, quite a bit we can learn from that
whole concept. Yeah. That's what I've been trying to tell people. They're, like, oh, I don't use
Snowflake. Maybe that's not going to apply to me. I'm, like, just go learn about the orbital part
of it. That's the, like, really big takeaway, and if anybody is curious about orbital, it's
basically, like, hey, you've got these models. They could be basic models. They could be complex
ML models that you can just, orbital can translate them into SQL to be run in SQL on your SQL
database to speed things up and be very magical. If you're looking for the talk where this was
talked about initially, I think it was Emile's talk last year at POSIT Conference, so maybe
somebody can go find that and stick it in the chat. I wanted to move over to Connor's question,
and Connor has a little asterisk saying, please ask this for me, so I am happy to. So, Connor
Tompkins asks, how would you suggest handling missing data in time series forecasting? And by
the way, there was a whole, like, smote question in the chat with lots of replies. I think Mark
was helping out with that question, so feel free to add more info here. Raise your hand if you have
any, but for example, if there is a blackout, that demand is censored. So, would you impute the
missing data with another time series model and then fit a final model based on that, like, actual
plus imputed data? That's a good question. Or do you impute at all? We do have some tools to impute,
but I hardly ever use them. But the team could probably interject and be like, Frank, don't say
that. I use it, like, every day. No, there's, like, it's a two-sided issue where, you know, you have
issues and zeros being, like, associated with energy data is, like, all the time, like, daylight
savings time. It's very annoying. And then, you know, or daylight savings time is very annoying
because it doesn't skip an hour, but, like, duplicates, like, just sums the total of the two
hours, and you're just, like, you need to, like, smooth some spikes out of data. Like, EIA data is
sometimes horrible in that regard. Like, it's just submitted to the EIA, and it's just, like,
it's a free data source, so I might have used it a few times, but the amount of cleaning that
you have to do is immense. But, you know, like, for zeros, it kind of depends. Is it one hour?
All of our models are hourly. So, I didn't really preface that, but, like, all of our models are
pretty much hourly models. If it's one hour versus, like, two weeks, we use different imputation
technique. So, you know, if this is one hour, like, you can just kind of smooth it with the
average of the last two on either side. That's pretty naive, but it's pretty much acceptable.
But, I mean, if you're missing, like, a week or two, then you might need to come through and, like,
impute that with a separate model altogether, and then depending on, yeah, if it's one day versus
two weeks, how complicated of an algorithm you're going to use. Right, yeah, and there's also some
pretty good papers on SMOTE, and maybe why it's not the greatest thing to use. So, those are
things I would go look out for and read. Yeah, I didn't see. I've been trying to keep track of the
chat, but there's no way. No worries, don't worry. Most of it went right past me. I didn't see the
comment on SMOTE, but I do not use SMOTE anywhere, if that helps. All right, well, we have about 10
minutes left. Let's see if we can get a couple more questions in here, and let's see. I saw
Ross ask one, Ross McKinnon, and it also has an asterisk, so I will ask it for him. Do you see
long-term electricity prices decreasing in the next 25 years due to the abundance of
renewables, like wind and solar, in lower population areas? What a good question, Ross.
Yeah, this is something I've talked with many people from many different
companies. I'm waiting to see who's right, but I think overall it's not a secret. I think
everyone thinks it's trending downward, but there's also
ancillary service prices, too. So, I skip over those a lot, but
if wind's serving your load and then you have a lull,
what solves for that lull in wind? It could just be for 30 minutes. So, you need to
have some sort of antithetical response to that to keep the frequency of the grid
constant. So, right now, that's normally natural gas. In the long term, you have wind and
solar. You have so much solar. You have so much battery that you can start to flatten out prices.
Prices should trend towards zero because the energy cost is zero, but then there's
like the maintenance of the solar and the wind and the transmission grid that does cost money.
But I think when you start – I think what will happen is you start layering in and everything
starts trending towards zero, but also gets more volatile, too. So, like, maybe prices are
typically zero but could bounce around to $100. I don't know. I just pulled $100 out of my hat.
So, any kind of – like, hey, we're typically averaging $30 now, standard deviation of one.
Maybe it goes to zero and standard deviation of two or three. So, we'll see.
Complicated answer, but it's a good question. Thank you so much, Ross, for asking that question.
And I wanted to ask kind of an overarching one or two for the last little bit here because we
usually ask a career advice question. So, really quickly, do you have any career advice? And then
I'll hop to one last one to wrap us up. Yeah, career advice is, like, interesting.
So, like, I feel like I've always led data scientist, mathematician, statistician kind
of people. So, I am typically lean introvert. So, I just say, like, get out of your chair
throughout the day and, like, just go talk to people. Tell them what you're doing. Just, like,
go and talk to an executive. You're going to feel so awkward and uncomfortable, probably.
Just get up from your desk and go and, like, quit playing with data for five minutes. And then also,
like, the other thing, too, is, like, you know, these machine learning algorithms. Like,
I could spend, like, months trying to tune a model. Or I can just say, hey, it's good enough.
So, like, understanding the business. The business is probably, like, I just need it now.
And if it has a rate of 6%, let's just go. Because, you know, if it takes you three more
weeks to get down to 2%, like, I don't need it by then. I need it today. So, like, understanding
what your business threshold is for that accuracy and knowing how to communicate to them, too. So,
like, business leaders like to use MAPE. We don't train our models with MAPE, but when I communicate
to them, I say MAPE. And MAPE for anybody is M-A-P-E, mean absolute percentage error.
So, that's, like, accuracy in a forecasting model. And sometimes it can be a little bit more
accessible than some of the other things that people in the data science side might be using.
I think that's great advice. And the last one to lead us out here,
Zach asked a fantastic question. Zach is one of our regulars here. And I think it's a good one
to talk about, like, what you're excited about. It is how do you see data science evolving within
the energy industry? Is there stuff that you think that's happening that's cool and new?
What are you excited about? Yeah. Yeah. I think it's, like, constantly evolving.
Like, I think, like, 15 years ago, you wouldn't need to build those complex models to handle
the simulations. And then 15 years from now, I have no idea what might occur in energy that might
make it twice as hard, but we'll have twice as much compute. So, we'll see what happens. But,
you know, like, also another crazy thing in energy right now is bringing data centers back
to the United States to train artificial intelligence, which creates so much demand.
And then it's like, okay, well, now I think, like, the next five, 10 years is, like, how do we build
on enough supply to serve this demand? So, it's constantly changing. There's always new risks and
all these new problems to be solved. I think, what was it? I think Thomas brought up energy
efficiency. Like, that's a huge problem in itself. It goes all the way down to a house level and
trying to simulate, like, every single appliance in someone's house and, like, understanding how
that changes over time. So, that's great. Yeah. This is a good follow-on to this. If anyone did
not attend Sajay Suresh's episode for Microsoft, Sajay is a Senior Director of Applied Science and
Data at Microsoft, but Sajay works on forecasting demand for these data centers, and that's a really
complicated and hard thing to do. His episode was fantastic, so go watch that one. And then I wanted
to give Rachel a chance to ask a question and also mention really quickly that Frank also does
open source package creation, and he, I think, Cusco just came out. I love the name Cusco because
I love the Emperor's New Groove. I don't know if that's why it's called that, but it's a package
for R to help with computer vision, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I don't know if Isabella's here,
but thanks for the mug. Yay, awesome. Yeah, Isabella might share that in the chat. All right,
Rachel, what did you want to ask? Oh, I was just curious, Frank, because you mentioned a few
different packages, like TinyModels and Targets, and you heard about the Orbital package too. Like,
how do you keep up to date on new packages? Especially for me working at Posit, it's always
really helpful for me to hear, like, how people find out about things. Yeah, I don't know if
everyone wants to know that I stay up all night just, like, surfing all of Posit's websites and
keeping track. No, like, you know, like, sometimes now that I'm more familiar with GitHub, sometimes
I, like, will peek at one of the packages and see if it has any merges lately, and I can kind of
get ahead of, like, a CRAN release, which is kind of fun when you're on to something like that,
like Mirai with her. It was something that my team and I was, like, watching for weeks, and I was,
like, is it going to get posted to CRAN this week or next week? Like, when's it going to happen?
You know, so, like, I'm on Blue Sky. I'm constantly watching any new releases from, like,
Simon. I follow him, I think, everywhere. Simon's on the Tiny Models team, but also leads, like,
tons of LLM stuff, so. I just saw Simon's here, too. Simon's in the chat. That's awesome.
Oh, weird. I've never actually talked to Simon face-to-face. Simon, I guess we have to unmute you.
Yes, you have to.
Celebrity spotting.
Thanks for being cool.
Yeah, that's so cool. Yeah, so, like, just following a few of the software engineers
across Posit is a great resource. Just following the boots on the ground,
going straight to the grassroots, and just, like, following the people they're building.
I think that's where I get most of my information.
I love it. Say their names, and they appear. You never know who's out there in the Hangout,
right? We have over 100 people. Usually, we have about 150 people lately,
so somebody might be hanging out and listening. Well, I want to wrap up and let everybody know
who is coming next week, because I am so excited to have Jenny Bryan next week.
Get your Laptop on Fire merch ready, and come hang out with Jenny and everybody,
and we'll talk about all kinds of good things. Get your Posit Conf registration in. There is
still time to book tickets, to book flights, to book hotel rooms. If you cannot attend in person,
come hang out with me on the Discord and attend virtually. I promise it's still going to be
amazing and fun and a great place to connect. And if you think that the chat was super valuable
today, you can go save it. Click the little three dots in the top right of your chat and go to Save
Chat. That will let you keep all of your resources. But when these videos end up on YouTube, I do try
to get all those resources in the description for you as well. So if there's something you've missed
in the past, you can go find it. Thank you, Frank, for hanging out with us today. Thank you, Rachel
and Isabella, for helping behind the scenes. Thank you so much, Frank. Bye, everybody.